Lesson 3: Translating Lines

Classwork

Exercises

Draw a line passing through point $P$ that is parallel to line $L$. Draw
a second line passing through point $P$ that is parallel to line $L$ and
that is distinct (i.e., different) from the first one. What do you
notice?

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:Untitled1.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.png){width="4.2in"
height="1.65in"}

Translate line $L$ along the vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$. What do you
notice about $L$ and its image, $L'$?

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:Untitled2.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image2.png){width="5.01in"
height="1.11in"}

Line $L$ is parallel to vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$. Translate line $L$
along vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$. What do you notice about $L$ and its
image, $L'$?

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:Untitled3.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image3.png){width="3.48in"
height="1.3in"}

Translate line $L$ along the vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$. What do you
notice about $L$ and its image, $L'$?

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:Untitled4.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image4.png){width="3.5934044181977254in"
height="1.6910126859142607in"}

Line $L$ has been translated along vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$,
resulting in $L'$. What do you know about lines $L$ and $L'$?

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image5.png){width="4.626864610673666in"
height="2.1641786964129484in"}

Translate $L_{1}$ and $L_{2}$ along vector $\overrightarrow{DE}$. Label
the images of the lines. If lines $L_{1}$ and $L_{2}$ are parallel, what
do you know about their translated images?

> ![Macintosh HD:Users:Stefanie:Dropbox:Module 2:Lesson 4
> images:transparalllinestudent.pdf](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image6.emf){width="6.208954505686789in"
> height="2.8731342957130357in"}

Problem Set

Lesson Summary

- Two lines in the plane are parallel if they do not intersect.

- Translations map parallel lines to parallel lines.

- Given a line $L$ and a point $P$ not lying on $L$, there is at most
  one line passing through $P$ and parallel to $L$.

  Translate $\angle XYZ$, point $A$, point $B$, and rectangle $HIJK$
  along vector $\overrightarrow{EF}$. Sketch the images, and label all
  points using prime notation.

![Macintosh HD:Users:Stefanie:Dropbox:Module 2:Lesson 4 images:translate
rect point
angle1.pdf](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image7.emf){width="6.8130818022747155in"
height="3.8695647419072614in"}

What is the measure of the translated image of $\angle XYZ$? How do you
know?

Connect $B$ to $B'$. What do you know about the line that contains the
segment formed by $BB'$ and the line containing the vector
$\overrightarrow{EF}$?

Connect $A$ to $A'$. What do you know about the line that contains the
segment formed by $AA'$ and the line containing the vector
$\overrightarrow{EF}$?

Given that figure $HIJK$ is a rectangle, what do you know about lines
that contain segments $HI$ and $JK$ and their translated images?
Explain.
