Lesson 13: Comparison of Numbers Written in Scientific Notation and
Interpreting Scientific Notation Using Technology

Classwork

There is a general principle that underlies the comparison of two
numbers in scientific notation: *Reduce everything to whole numbers if
possible.* To this end, we recall two basic facts.

Inequality (A): Let $x$ and $y\ $be numbers and let $z > 0$. Then
$x < y$ if and only if $xz < yz$.

Comparison of whole numbers:

a.  If two whole numbers have different numbers of digits, then the one
    with more digits is greater.

b.  Suppose two whole numbers $p\ $and $q$ have the same number of
    digits and, moreover, they agree digit-by-digit (starting from the
    left) until the $n$^th^ place. If the digit of $p$ in the
    $(n + 1)$^th^ place is greater than the corresponding digit in $q$,
    then $p > q$.

Exercise 1

The Fornax Dwarf galaxy is $4.6 \times 10^{5}$ light-years away from
Earth, while Andromeda I is $2.430 \times 10^{6}$ light-years away from
Earth. Which is closer to Earth?

Exercise 2

The average lifetime of the tau lepton is $2.906 \times 10^{- 13}$
seconds, and the average lifetime of the neutral pion is
$8.4 \times 10^{- 17}$ seconds. Explain which subatomic particle has a
longer average lifetime.

Exploratory Challenge 1/Exercise 3

**[Theorem]{.smallcaps}*:*** *Given two positive numbers in scientific
notation,* $a \times 10^{m}$ *and* $b \times 10^{n}$*, if* $m < n$*,
then* $a \times 10^{m} < b \times 10^{n}$*.\*
\
Prove the theorem.

Exercise 4

Compare $9.3 \times 10^{28}$ and $9.2879 \times 10^{28}$.

Exercise 5

Chris said that $5.3 \times 10^{41} < 5.301 \times 10^{41}$ because
$5.3$ has fewer digits than $5.301$. Show that even though his answer is
correct, his reasoning is flawed. Show him an example to illustrate that
his reasoning would result in an incorrect answer. Explain.

Exploratory Challenge 2/Exercise 6

You have been asked to determine the exact number of Google searches
that are made each year. The only information you are provided is that
there are $35,939,938,877\ $searches performed each week. Assuming the
exact same number of searches are performed each week for the $52$ weeks
in a year, how many total searches will have been performed in one year?
Your calculator does not display enough digits to get the exact answer.
Therefore, you must break down the problem into smaller parts. Remember,
you cannot approximate an answer because you need to find an exact
answer. Use the screen shots below to help you reach your answer.

![Macintosh HD:Users:shassan:Desktop:shot
1.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.png){width="1.7in"
height="1.909588801399825in"} ![Macintosh HD:Users:shassan:Desktop:shot
2.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image2.png){width="1.7in"
height="1.8965988626421697in"}

Yahoo! is another popular search engine. Yahoo! receives requests for
$1,792,671,355$ searches each month. Assuming the same number of
searches are performed each month, how many searches are performed on
Yahoo! each year? Use the screen shots below to help determine the
answer.

![Macintosh HD:Users:shassan:Desktop:shot
3.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image3.png){width="1.7604166666666667in"
height="1.9479166666666667in"} ![Macintosh HD:Users:shassan:Desktop:shot
4.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image4.png){width="1.75in"
height="1.9479166666666667in"}

*\*
Problem Set

Write out a detailed proof of the fact that, given two numbers in
scientific notation, $a \times 10^{n}$ and $b \times 10^{n}$, $a < b$,
if and only if $a \times 10^{n} < b \times 10^{n}$.

c.  Let $A$ and $B$ be two positive numbers, with no restrictions on
    their size. Is it true that $A \times 10^{- 5} < B \times 10^{5}$?

d.  Now, if $A \times 10^{- 5}$ and $B \times 10^{5}$ are written in
    scientific notation, is it true that
    $A \times 10^{- 5} < B \times 10^{5}$? Explain.

    The mass of a neutron is approximately
    $1.674927 \times 10^{- 27}\ kg$. Recall that the mass of a proton
    is\
    $1.672622 \times 10^{- 27}\ kg$. Explain which is heavier.

    The average lifetime of the Z boson is approximately
    $3 \times 10^{- 25}$ seconds, and the average lifetime of a neutral
    rho meson is approximately $4.5 \times 10^{- 24}$ seconds.

e.  Without using the theorem from today's lesson, explain why the
    neutral rho meson has a longer average lifetime.

f.  Approximately how much longer is the lifetime of a neutral rho meson
    than a Z boson?
