Lesson 10: Linear Models

Classwork

In previous lessons, you used data that follow a linear trend either in
the positive direction or the negative direction and informally fit a
line through the data. You determined the equation of an informal fitted
line and used it to make predictions.

In this lesson, you use a function to model a linear relationship
between two numerical variables and interpret the slope and intercept of
the linear model in the context of the data. Recall that a function is a
rule that relates a dependent variable to an independent variable.

In statistics, a dependent variable is also called a *response variable*
or a *predicted variable*. An independent variable is also called an
*explanatory variable* or a *predictor variable*.

**Example 1**

Predicting the value of a numerical dependent (response) variable based
on the value of a given numerical independent variable has many
applications in statistics. The first step in the process is to identify
the dependent (predicted) variable and the independent (predictor)
variable.

There may be several independent variables that might be used to predict
a given dependent variable. For example, suppose you want to predict how
well you are going to do on an upcoming statistics quiz. One possible
independent variable is how much time you spent studying for the quiz.
What are some other possible numerical independent variables that could
relate to how well you are going to do on the quiz?

**Exercises 1--2**

For each of the following dependent (response) variables, identify two
possible numerical independent (explanatory) variables that might be
used to predict the value of the dependent variable.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| **Response Variable**             | **Possible Explanatory            |
|                                   | Variables**                       |
+===================================+===================================+
| Height of a son                   |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Number of points scored in a game |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| by a basketball player            |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Number of hamburgers to make      |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| for a family picnic               |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Time it takes a person to run a   |                                   |
| mile                              |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Amount of money won by a          |                                   |
| contestant                        |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| on Jeopardy!^TM^ (television game |                                   |
| show)                             |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| **Response Variable**             | **Possible Explanatory            |
|                                   | Variables**                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Fuel efficiency (in miles per     |                                   |
| gallon) for a car                 |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Number of honey bees in a beehive |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| at a particular time              |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Number of blooms on a dahlia      |                                   |
| plant                             |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Number of forest fires in a state |                                   |
| during a particular year          |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Now, reverse your thinking. For each of the following numerical
independent variables, write a possible numerical dependent variable.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Dependent Variable**                 **Possible Independent
                                         Variables**
  -------------------------------------- --------------------------------
                                         Age of a student

                                         Height of a golfer

                                         Amount of a pain reliever taken

                                         Number of years of education

                                         Amount of fertilizer used on a
                                         garden

                                         Size of a diamond in a ring

                                         Total salary for all of a team's
                                         players
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Example 2**

A cell phone company offers the following basic cell phone plan to its
customers: A customer pays a monthly fee of $\$ 40.00$. In addition, the
customer pays $\$ 0.15$ per text message sent from the cell phone. There
is no limit to the number of text messages per month that could be sent,
and there is no charge for receiving text messages.

Exercises 3--11

Determine the following:

Justin never sends a text message. What would be his total monthly cost?

During a typical month, Abbey sends $25$ text messages. What is her
total cost for a typical month?

Robert sends at least $250$ text messages a month. What would be an
estimate of the least his total monthly cost is likely to be?

Use descriptive words to write a linear model describing the
relationship between the number of text messages sent and the total
monthly cost.

Is the relationship between the number of text messages sent and the
total monthly cost linear? Explain your answer.

Let $x$ represent the independent variable and $y$ represent the
dependent variable. Use the variables $x$ and $y$ to write the function
representing the relationship you indicated in Exercise 4.

Explain what $\$ 0.15\ $represents in this relationship.

Explain what $\$ 40.00$ represents in this relationship.

Sketch a graph of this relationship on the following coordinate grid.
Clearly label the axes, and include units in the labels.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.wmf)

LaMoyne needs four more pieces of lumber for his Scout project. The
pieces can be cut from one large piece of lumber according to the
following pattern.

The lumberyard will make the cuts for LaMoyne at a fixed cost of
$\$ 2.25$ plus an additional cost of $25\ $cents per cut. One cut is
free.

What is the functional relationship between the total cost of cutting a
piece of lumber and the number of cuts required? What is the equation of
this function? Be sure to define the variables in the context of this
problem.

Use the equation to determine LaMoyne's total cost for cutting.

In the context of this problem, interpret the slope of the equation in
words.

Interpret the $y$-intercept of your equation in words in the context of
this problem. Does interpreting the intercept make sense in this
problem? Explain.

Omar and Olivia were curious about the size of coins. They measured the
diameter and circumference of several coins and found the following
data.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **U.S. Coin**   **Diameter (millimeters)**        **Circumference
                                                    (millimeters)**
  -------------- ---------------------------- ----------------------------
      Penny                $$19.0$$                     $$59.7$$

      Nickel               $$21.2$$                     $$66.6$$

       Dime                $$17.9$$                     $$56.2$$

     Quarter               $$24.3$$                     $$76.3$$

   Half Dollar             $$30.6$$                     $$96.1$$
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wondering if there was any relationship between diameter and
circumference, they thought about drawing a picture. Draw a scatter plot
that displays circumference in terms of diameter.

Do you think that circumference and diameter are related? Explain.

Find the equation of the function relating circumference to the diameter
of a coin.

The value of the slope is approximately equal to the value of $\pi$.
Explain why this makes sense.

What is the value of the $y$-intercept? Explain why this makes sense.

Problem Set

Lesson Summary

- A linear functional relationship between a dependent and an
  independent numerical variable has the form $y = mx + b$ or
  $y = a + bx$.

- In statistics, a dependent variable is one that is predicted, and an
  independent variable is the one that is used to make the prediction.

- The graph of a linear function describing the relationship between two
  variables is a line.

  The Mathematics Club at your school is having a meeting. The advisor
  decides to bring bagels and his award-winning strawberry cream cheese.
  To determine his cost, from past experience he figures $1.5$ bagels
  per student.\
  A bagel costs $65\ $cents, and the special cream cheese costs
  $\$ 3.85$ and will be able to serve all of the anticipated students
  attending the meeting

  Find an equation that relates his total cost to the number of students
  he thinks will attend the meeting.

  In the context of the problem, interpret the slope of the equation in
  words.

  In the context of the problem, interpret the $y$-intercept of the
  equation in words. Does interpreting the intercept make sense?
  Explain.

  John, Dawn, and Ron agree to walk/jog for $45$ minutes. John has
  arthritic knees but manages to walk $1\frac{1}{2}$ miles. Dawn walks
  $2\frac{1}{4}$ miles, while Ron manages to jog $6$ miles.

  Draw an appropriate graph, and connect the points to show that there
  is a linear relationship between the distance that each traveled based
  on how fast each traveled (speed). Note that the speed for a person
  who travels $3$ miles in $45$ minutes, or $\frac{3}{4}$ hour, is found
  using the expression $3 \div \frac{3}{4}$, which is $4$ miles per
  hour.

  Find an equation that expresses distance in terms of speed (how fast
  one goes).

  In the context of the problem, interpret the slope of the equation in
  words.

  In the context of the problem, interpret the $y$-intercept of the
  equation in words. Does interpreting the intercept make sense?
  Explain.

  Simple interest is money that is paid on a loan. Simple interest is
  calculated by taking the amount of the loan and multiplying it by the
  rate of interest per year and the number of years the loan is
  outstanding. For college, Jodie's older brother has taken out a
  student loan for $\$ 4,500$ at an annual interest rate of $5.6\%$, or
  $0.056$. When he graduates in four years, he has to pay back the loan
  amount plus interest for four years. Jodie is curious as to how much
  her brother has to pay.

  Jodie claims that her brother has to pay a total of $\$ 5,508$. Do you
  agree? Explain. As an example, a $\$ 1,200$ loan has an $8\%$ annual
  interest rate. The simple interest for one year is $\$ 96$ because
  $(0.08)(1200) = 96$. The interest for two years would be $\$ 192$
  because $(2)(96) = 192$.

  Write an equation for the total cost to repay a loan of $\$ P$ if the
  rate of interest for a year is $r$ (expressed as a decimal) for a time
  span of $t$ years.

  If $P$ and $r$ are known, is the equation a linear equation?

  In the context of the problem, interpret the slope of the equation in
  words.

  In the context of the problem, interpret the $y$-intercept of the
  equation in words. Does interpreting the intercept make sense?
  Explain.
