Lesson 4: Definition of Reflection and Basic Properties

Classwork

**Exercises**

Reflect $\mathbf{\bigtriangleup}ABC$ and Figure $D$ across line $L$.
Label the reflected images.

![Macintosh HD:Users:shassan:Dropbox:Module 2:Images:Def of
Reflection:ex
1s.pdf](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.emf){width="4.87in"
height="4.77in"}

Which figure(s) were not moved to a new location on the plane under this
transformation?

Reflect the images across line $L$. Label the reflected images.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image2.png){width="4.102708880139983in"
height="4.419666447944007in"}

Answer the questions about the image above.

Use a protractor to measure the reflected $\angle ABC$. What do you
notice?

Use a ruler to measure the length of $IJ$ and the length of the image of
$IJ$ after the reflection. What do you notice?

Reflect Figure $R$ and $\mathbf{\bigtriangleup}EFG$ across line $L$.
Label the reflected images.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image3.png){width="6.833333333333333in"
height="2.6485783027121608in"}

Basic Properties of Reflections:

> (Reflection 1) A reflection maps a line to a line, a ray to a ray, a
> segment to a segment, and an angle to an angle.

(Reflection 2) A reflection preserves lengths of segments.

(Reflection 3) A reflection preserves measures of angles.

If the reflection is across a line $L$ and $P$ is a point not on $L$,
then $L$ bisects and is perpendicular to the segment $PP'$, joining $P$
to its reflected image $P'$. That is, the lengths of $OP$ and $OP'$ are
equal.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image40.png){width="1.8437631233595801in"
height="1.7351749781277341in"}

Use the picture below for Exercises 6--9.

![Macintosh HD:Users:shassan:Desktop:ex
6s.pdf](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image5.emf){width="6.89340113735783in"
height="4.8in"}

Use the picture to label the unnamed points.

What is the measure of $\angle JKI$? $\angle KIJ$? $\angle ABC$? How do
you know?

What is the length of segment $Reflection(FH)$? $IJ$? How do you know?

What is the location of $Reflection(D)$? Explain.

Lesson Summary

- A reflection is another type of basic rigid motion.

- A reflection across a line maps one half-plane to the other
  half-plane; that is, it maps points from one side of the line to the
  other side of the line. The reflection maps each point on the line to
  itself. The line being reflected across is called the *line of
  reflection*.

- When a point $P$ is joined with its reflection $P'$ to form the
  segment $PP'$, the line of reflection bisects and is perpendicular to
  the segment $PP'$.

**Terminology**

**[Reflection]{.smallcaps}** **(description):** Given a line $L$ in the
plane, a *reflection across* $L$ is the transformation of the plane that
maps each point on the line $L$ to itself, and maps each remaining point
$P$ of the plane to its image $P'$ such that $L$ is the perpendicular
bisector of the segment $PP'$.

Problem Set

In the picture below, $\angle DEF = 56{^\circ}$,
$\angle ACB = 114{^\circ}$, $AB = 12.6$ units, $JK = 5.32$ units, point
$E$ is on line $L$, and point $I$ is off of line $L$. Let there be a
reflection across line $L$. Reflect and label each of the figures, and
answer the questions that follow.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image6.png){width="4.23in"
height="4.0in"}

What is the measure of $Reflection(\angle DEF)$? Explain.

What is the length of $Reflection(JK)$? Explain.

What is the measure of $Reflection(\angle ACB)$?

What is the length of $Reflection(AB)$?

Two figures in the picture were not moved under the reflection. Name the
two figures, and explain why they were not moved.

Connect points $I$ and $I'$. Name the point of intersection of the
segment with the line of reflection point $Q$. What do you know about
the lengths of segments $IQ$ and $QI'$?
