Lesson 5: Writing and Solving Linear Equations

Classwork

**Example 1**

One angle is five degrees less than three times the degree measure of
another angle. Together, the angles measures have a sum of
$143{^\circ}$. What is the measure of each angle?

**Example 2**

Given a right triangle, find the degree measure of the angles if one
angle is ten degrees more than four times the degree measure of the
other angle and the third angle is the right angle.

Exercises

For each of the following problems, write an equation and solve.

A pair of congruent angles are described as follows: The degree measure
of one angle is three more than twice a number, and the other angle's
degree measure is $54.5\ $less than three times the number. Determine
the measure of the angles in degrees.

The measure of one angle is described as twelve more than four times a
number. Its supplement is twice as large. Find the measure of each angle
in degrees.

A triangle has angles described as follows: The measure of the first
angle is four more than seven times a number, the measure of the second
angle is four less than the first, and the measure of the third angle is
twice as large as the first. What is the measure of each angle in
degrees?

One angle measures nine more than six times a number. A sequence of
rigid motions maps the angle onto another angle that is described as
being thirty less than nine times the number. What is the measure of the
angle in degrees?

A right triangle is described as having an angle of measure six less
than negative two times a number, another angle measure that is three
less than negative one-fourth the number, and a right angle. What are
the measures of the angles in degrees?

One angle is one less than six times the measure of another. The two
angles are complementary angles. Find the measure of each angle in
degrees.

Problem Set

For each of the following problems, write an equation and solve.

The measure of one angle is thirteen less than five times the measure of
another angle. The sum of the measures of the two angles is
$140{^\circ}$. Determine the measure of each angle in degrees.

An angle measures seventeen more than three times a number. Its
supplement is three more than seven times the number. What is the
measure of each angle in degrees?

The angles of a triangle are described as follows: $\angle A\ $is the
largest angle; its measure is twice the measure of $\angle B$. The
measure of $\angle C$ is $2$ less than half the measure of $\angle B.$
Find the measures of the three angles in degrees.

A pair of corresponding angles are described as follows: The measure of
one angle is five less than seven times a number, and the measure of the
other angle is eight more than seven times the number. Are the angles
congruent? Why or why not?

The measure of one angle is eleven more than four times a number.
Another angle is twice the first angle's measure. The sum of the
measures of the angles is $195{^\circ}$. What is the measure of each
angle in degrees?

Three angles are described as follows: $\ \angle B$ is half the size of
$\angle A$. The measure of $\angle C$ is equal to one less than two
times the measure of $\angle B$. The sum of $\angle A$ and $\angle B$ is
$114{^\circ}$. Can the three angles form a triangle? Why or why not?
