Lesson 15: Pythagorean Theorem, Revisited

Classwork

Proof of the Pythagorean Theorem

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.png){width="2.2694094488188976in"
height="1.5340277777777778in"}

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image2.png){width="2.21875in"
height="1.5690234033245845in"}

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image3.png){width="6.282841207349081in"
height="1.347826990376203in"}

Discussion

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image4.png){width="2.1401137357830273in"
height="1.362516404199475in"}

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image5.png){width="4.033109142607174in"
height="4.847981189851269in"}

Lesson Summary

The Pythagorean theorem can be proven by drawing an altitude in the
given right triangle and identifying three similar triangles. We can see
geometrically how the large square drawn on the hypotenuse of the
triangle has an area summing to the areas of the two smaller squares
drawn on the legs of the right triangle.

Problem Set

For the right triangle shown below, identify and use similar triangles
to illustrate the Pythagorean theorem.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image6.png){width="2.9699365704286964in"
height="1.7713210848643919in"}

For the right triangle shown below, identify and use squares formed by
the sides of the triangle to illustrate the Pythagorean theorem.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image7.png){width="2.059671916010499in"
height="1.6226356080489939in"}![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image8.png){width="2.664381014873141in"
height="2.784229002624672in"}

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image9.png){width="3.15in"
height="3.3097222222222222in"}Reese claimed that any figure can be drawn
off the sides of a right triangle and that as long as they are similar
figures, then the sum of the areas off of the legs will equal the area
off of the hypotenuse. She drew the diagram by constructing rectangles
off of each side of a known right triangle. Is Reese's claim correct for
this example? In order to prove or disprove Reese's claim, you must
first show that the rectangles are similar. If they are, then you can
use computations to show that the sum of the areas of the figures off of
the sides $a$ and $b$ equals the area of the figure off of side $c.$

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image10.png){width="2.9715277777777778in"
height="3.4in"}

After learning the proof of the Pythagorean theorem using areas of
squares, Joseph got really excited and tried explaining it to his
younger brother. He realized during his explanation that he had done
something wrong. Help Joseph find his error. Explain what he did wrong.

Draw a right triangle with squares constructed off of each side that
Joseph can use the next time he wants to show his younger brother the
proof of the Pythagorean theorem.

Explain the meaning of the Pythagorean theorem in your own words.

Draw a diagram that shows an example illustrating the Pythagorean
theorem.
