Lesson 8: Estimating Quantities

Classwork

Exercise 1

The Federal Reserve states that the average household in January of
$2013$ had $\$ 7,122\ $in credit card debt. About how many times greater
is the U.S. national debt, which is $\$ 16,755,133,009,522$? Rewrite
each number to the nearest power of $10$ that exceeds it, and then
compare.

Exercise 2

There are about $3,000,000\ $students attending school, kindergarten
through Grade 12, in New York. Express the number of students as a
single-digit integer times a power of $10$.

The average number of students attending a middle school in New York is
$8 \times 10^{2}$. How many times greater is the overall number of K--12
students compared to the average number of middle school students?

Exercise 3

A conservative estimate of the number of stars in the universe is
$6 \times 10^{22}$. The average human can see about $3,000\ $stars at
night with his naked eye. About how many times more stars are there in
the universe compared to the stars a human can actually see?

Exercise 4

The estimated world population in $2011$ was $7 \times 10^{9}$. Of the
total population, $682$ million of those people were left-handed.
Approximately what percentage of the world population is left-handed
according to the $2011$ estimation?

Exercise 5

The average person takes about $30,000$ breaths per day. Express this
number as a single-digit integer times a power of $10$.

If the average American lives about $80$ years (or about $30,000$ days),
how many total breaths will a person take in her lifetime?

*\*
Problem Set

The Atlantic Ocean region contains approximately $2 \times 10^{16}$
gallons of water. Lake Ontario has approximately
$8,000,000,000\ $gallons of water. How many Lake Ontarios would it take
to fill the Atlantic Ocean region in terms of gallons of water?

U.S. national forests cover approximately $300,000$ square miles.
Conservationists want the total square footage of forests to be
${300,000}^{2}$ square miles. When Ivanna used her phone to do the
calculation, her screen showed the following:

a.  ![Macintosh
    HD:Users:shassan:Desktop:photo.PNG](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.png){width="1.1263888888888889in"
    height="1.9958333333333333in"} What does the answer on her screen
    mean? Explain how you know.

b.  Given that the U.S. has approximately $4$ million square miles of
    land, is this a\
    reasonable goal for conservationists? Explain.

    The average American is responsible for about $20,000$ kilograms of
    carbon emission pollution each year. Express this number as a
    single-digit integer times a power of $10$.

    The United Kingdom is responsible for about $1 \times 10^{4}$
    kilograms of carbon emission pollution each year. Which country is
    responsible for greater carbon emission pollution each year? By how
    much?
