Lesson 8: Sequencing Reflections and Translations

Classwork

Exercises 1--3

Use the figure below to answer Exercises 1--3.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.png){width="7.033519247594051in"
height="5.151902887139108in"}

Figure $A$ was translated along vector $\overrightarrow{BA}$, resulting
in $Translation(Figure\ A)$. Describe a sequence of translations that
would map Figure $A$ back onto its original position.

Figure $A$ was reflected across line $L$, resulting in
$Reflection(Figure\ A)$. Describe a sequence of reflections that would
map Figure $A$ back onto its original position.

Can ${Translation}_{\overrightarrow{BA}}$ of Figure $A$ undo the
transformation of ${Translation}_{\overrightarrow{DC}}\ \ $of Figure
$A$? Why or why not?

Exercises 4--7

Let $S$ be the black figure.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image2.png){width="6.413506124234471in"
height="5.4625in"}

Let there be the translation along vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$ and a
reflection across line $L$.

Use a transparency to perform the following sequence: Translate figure
$S$; then, reflect figure $S$*.* Label the image $S'$.

Let there be the translation along vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$ and a
reflection across line $L$.

Use a transparency to perform the following sequence: Reflect figure
$S$; then, translate figure $S$*.* Label the image $S''$*.*

Using your transparency, show that under a sequence of any two
translations, $Translation$ and ${Translation}_{0}$ (along different
vectors), that the sequence of the $Translation$ followed by the
${Translation}_{0}$ is equal to the sequence of the ${Translation}_{0}$
followed by the $Translation$*.* That is, draw a figure, $A$, and two
vectors. Show that the translation along the first vector, followed by a
translation along the second vector, places the figure in the same
location as when you perform the translations in the reverse order.
(This fact is proven in high school Geometry.) Label the transformed
image $A'$. Now, draw two new vectors and translate along them just as
before. This time, label the transformed image $A''$. Compare your work
with a partner. Was the statement "the sequence of the $Translation$
followed by the ${Translation}_{0}$ is equal to the sequence of the
${Translation}_{0}$ followed by the $Translation$" true in all cases? Do
you think it will always be true?

Does the same relationship you noticed in Exercise 6 hold true when you
replace one of the translations with a reflection. That is, is the
following statement true: A translation followed by a reflection is
equal to a reflection followed by a translation?

Lesson Summary

- A reflection across a line followed by a reflection across the same
  line places all figures in the plane back onto their original
  position.

- A reflection followed by a translation does not necessarily place a
  figure in the same location in the plane as a translation followed by
  a reflection. The order in which we perform a sequence of rigid
  motions matters.

Problem Set

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image3.png){width="2.6638888888888888in"
height="1.8618055555555555in"}Let there be a reflection across line $L$,
and let there be a translation along vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$, as
shown. If $S\ $denotes the black figure, compare the translation of
$S\ $followed by the reflection of $S\ $with the reflection of $S$
followed by the translation of $S$*.*

Let $L_{1}$ and $L_{2}$ be parallel lines, and let ${Reflection}_{1}$
and ${Reflection}_{2}$ be the reflections across $L_{1}$ and $L_{2}$,
respectively (in that order). Show that a ${Reflection}_{2}\ $followed
by $Reflection_{1}$ is not equal to a $Reflection_{1}\ $followed by
$Reflection_{2}$. (Hint: Take a point on $L_{1}$ and see what each of
the sequences does to it.)

![Macintosh HD:Users:shassan:Desktop:ps
2b.pdf](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image4.emf){width="6.8971041119860015in"
height="1.9958333333333333in"}

Let $L_{1}$ and $L_{2}$ be parallel lines, and let ${Reflection}_{1}$
and ${Reflection}_{2}$ be the reflections across $L_{1}$ and $L_{2}$,
respectively (in that order). Can you guess what ${Reflection}_{1}$
followed by ${Reflection}_{2}$ is? Give as persuasive an argument as you
can. (Hint: Examine the work you just finished for the last problem.)
