Lesson 2: Linear and Nonlinear Expressions in $\mathbf{x}$

Classwork

Exercises

Write each of the following statements in Exercises 1--12$\ $as a
mathematical expression. State whether or not the expression is linear
or nonlinear. If it is nonlinear, then explain why.

The sum of a number and four times the number

The product of five and a number

Multiply six and the reciprocal of the quotient of a number and seven.

Twice a number subtracted from four times a number, added to $15$

The square of the sum of six and a number

The cube of a positive number divided by the square of the same positive
number

The sum of four consecutive numbers

Four subtracted from the reciprocal of a number

Half of the product of a number multiplied by itself three times

The sum that shows how many pages Maria read if she read $45$ pages of a
book yesterday and $\frac{2}{3}$ of the remaining pages today

An admission fee of $\$ 10$ plus an additional $\$ 2$ per game

Five more than four times a number and then twice that sum

Lesson Summary

A *linear expression* is an expression that is equivalent to the sum or
difference of one or more expressions where each expression is either a
number, a variable, or a product of a number and a variable.

A linear expression in $x$ can be represented by terms whose variable
$x$ is raised to either a power of $0$ or $1$. For example, $4 + 3x$,
$7x + x - 15$, and $\frac{1}{2}x + 7 - 2$ are all linear expressions in
$x$. A nonlinear expression in $x$ has terms where $x$ is raised to a
power that is not $0$ or $1$. For example, $2x^{2} - 9$,
$- 6x^{- 3} + 8 + x$, and $\frac{1}{x} + 8$ are all nonlinear
expressions in $x$.

Problem Set

Write each of the following statements as a mathematical expression.
State whether the expression is linear or nonlinear. If it is nonlinear,
then explain why.

A number decreased by three squared

The quotient of$\ $two and a number, subtracted from seventeen

The sum of thirteen and twice a number

$5.2$ more than the product of seven and a number

The sum that represents the number of tickets sold if$\ 35$ tickets were
sold Monday, half of the remaining tickets were sold on Tuesday, and
$14$ tickets were sold on Wednesday

The product of $19$ and a number, subtracted from the reciprocal of the
number cubed

The product of $15$ and a number, and then the product multiplied by
itself$\ $four times

A number increased by five and then divided by two

Eight times the result of subtracting three from a number

The sum of twice a number and four times a number subtracted from the
number squared

One-third of the result of three times a number that is increased
by$\ 12$

Five times the sum of one-half and a number

Three-fourths of a number multiplied by seven

The sum of a number and negative three, multiplied by the number

The square of the difference between a number and $10$
