Lesson 29: Word Problems

Classwork

**Example 1**

The sum of two numbers is $361$, and the difference between the two
numbers is $173$. What are the two numbers?

**Example 2**

There are $356$ eighth-grade students at Euclid's Middle School.
Thirty-four more than four times the number of girls is equal to half
the number of boys. How many boys are in eighth grade at Euclid's Middle
School? How many girls?

**Example 3**

A family member has some five-dollar bills and one-dollar bills in her
wallet. Altogether she has $18$ bills and a total of $\$ 62$. How many
of each bill does she have?

**Example 4**

A friend bought $2$ boxes of pencils and $8\ $notebooks for school, and
it cost him $\$ 11$. He went back to the store the same day to buy
school supplies for his younger brother. He spent $\$ 11.25$ on $3$
boxes of pencils and $5$ notebooks. How much would $7$ notebooks cost?

Exercises

A farm raises cows and chickens. The farmer has a total of $42$ animals.
One day he counts the legs of all of his animals and realizes he has a
total of $114$. How many cows does the farmer have? How many chickens?

The length of a rectangle is $4\ $times the width. The perimeter of the
rectangle is $45\ $inches. What is the area of the rectangle?

The sum of the measures of angles $x$ and $y$ is $127{^\circ}$. If the
measure of $\angle x$ is $34{^\circ}$ more than half the measure of
$\angle y$, what is the measure of each angle?

Problem Set

Two numbers have a sum of $1,212$ and a difference of $518$. What are
the two numbers?

The sum of the ages of two brothers is $46$. The younger brother is $10$
more than a third of the older brother's age. How old is the younger
brother?

One angle measures $54$ more degrees than $3$ times another angle. The
angles are supplementary. What are their measures?

Some friends went to the local movie theater and bought four large
buckets of popcorn and six boxes of candy. The total for the snacks was
$\$ 46.50$. The last time you were at the theater, you bought a large
bucket of popcorn and a box of candy, and the total was $\$ 9.75$. How
much would $2$ large buckets of popcorn and $3$ boxes of candy cost?

You have $59$ total coins for a total of $\$ 12.05$. You only have
quarters and dimes. How many of each coin do you have?

A piece of string is $112$ inches long. Isabel wants to cut it into $2$
pieces so that one piece is three times as long as the other. How long
is each piece?
