Lesson 2: Definition of Translation and Three Basic Properties

Classwork

Exercise 1

Draw at least three different vectors, and show what a translation of
the plane along each vector looks like. Describe what happens to the
following figures under each translation using appropriate vocabulary
and notation as needed.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image1.png){width="3.6118055555555557in"
height="4.279861111111111in"}

Exercise 2

The diagram below shows figures and their images under a translation
along $\overrightarrow{HI}$. Use the original figures and the translated
images to fill in missing labels for points and measures.

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image2.png){width="6.833333333333333in"
height="5.392870734908136in"}

Lesson Summary

Translation occurs along a given vector:

- A *vector* is directed line segment, that is, it is a segment with a
  direction given by connecting one of its endpoint (called the *initial
  point* or *starting point*) to the other endpoint (called the
  *terminal point* or simply the *endpoint*). It is often represented as
  an "arrow" with a "tail" and a "tip."

- The *length of a vector* is, by definition, the length of its
  underlying segment.

- Pictorially note the starting and endpoints:

![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image30.png){width="1.905660542432196in"
height="0.9059700349956256in"}
![](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image40.png){width="1.6395341207349081in"
height="0.7647069116360455in"}

A translation of a plane along a given vector is a basic rigid motion of
a plane.

The three basic properties of translation are as follows:

> (Translation 1) A translation maps a line to a line, a ray to a ray, a
> segment to a segment, and an angle to an angle.
>
> (Translation 2) A translation preserves lengths of segments.
>
> (Translation 3) A translation preserves measures of angles.

**Terminology**

**[Translation]{.smallcaps} (description):** For vector
$\overrightarrow{AB}$, a *translation along* $\overrightarrow{AB}$ is
the transformation of the plane that maps each point $C$ of the plane to
its image $C'$ so that the line $\overset{\overleftrightarrow{}}{CC'}$
is parallel to the vector (or contains it), and the vector
$\overrightarrow{CC'}$ points in the same direction and is the same
length as the vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$.

Problem Set

Translate the plane containing Figure $A$ along $\overrightarrow{AB}$.
Use your transparency to sketch the image of Figure $A$ by this
translation. Mark points on Figure $A$, and label the image of Figure
$A$ accordingly.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:untitled1.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image5.png){width="2.560001093613298in"
height="1.6in"}

Translate the plane containing Figure $B$ along $\overrightarrow{BA}$.
Use your transparency to sketch the image of Figure $B$ by this
translation. Mark points on Figure $B$, and label the image of Figure
$B$ accordingly.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:Untitled2.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image6.png){width="2.0713003062117235in"
height="1.2in"}

Draw an acute angle (your choice of degree), a segment with length
$3\ cm$, a point, a circle with radius $1\ in.$, and a vector (your
choice of length, i.e., starting point and ending point). Label points
and measures (measurements do not need to be precise, but your figure
must be labeled correctly). Use your transparency to translate all of
the figures you have drawn along the vector. Sketch the images of the
translated figures and label them.

What is the length of the translated segment? How does this length
compare to the length of the original segment? Explain.

What is the length of the radius in the translated circle? How does this
radius length compare to the radius of the original circle? Explain.

What is the degree of the translated angle? How does this degree compare
to the degree of the original angle? Explain.

Translate point $D$ along vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$, and label the
image $D'$. What do you notice about the line containing vector
$\overrightarrow{AB}$ and the line containing points $D$ and $D'$?
(Hint: Will the lines ever intersect?)

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:Untitled3.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image7.png){width="2.1583803587051618in"
height="1.1in"}

Translate point $E$ along vector $\overrightarrow{AB}$, and label the
image $E'$. What do you notice about the line containing vector
$\overrightarrow{AB}$ and the line containing points $E$ and $E'$?

![Macintosh
HD:Users:Stefanie:Desktop:Untitled4.tiff](.\grade8lessonsmd\media/media/image8.png){width="1.2388549868766405in"
height="1.2in"}
